Archived from:
https://www.realworldtech.com/forum/?threadid=70864&curpostid=70875

By: Linus Torvalds (torvalds.delete@this.osdl.org), August 30, 2006 6:34 pm
Paul DeMone (pdemone@igs.net) on 8/30/06 wrote:
>
>Yet IBM persists in trying to sell Linux on PowerPC. :-P

For once, I'll just forgo the IPF angle entirely, and just
concentrate on Linux on POWER instead.

I don't think Linux on POWER has anything to do with
any IFP push (or lack there-of) at all, and has everything
to do with the fact that IBM has real customers running
Linux, and strategic positioning wrt that.

Now, the fact is, if you're running Linux, you'd normally
do it not on POWER as a primary platform, but using the
much more common PC platforms (either 32-bit or 64-bit x86).

IOW, the kinds of customers that ask for Linux usually
don't necessarily ask for POWER.

So I don't think the relatively low volumes of Linux on
POWER reflects anything else than the fact that Linux/x86
does extremely well, and obviously tends to be (in many
areas) the price/performance leader by a long shot. Perhaps
not always, but probably most of the time.

So why do Linux/POWER at all then?

I suspect (but hey, don't take this as gospel: I may have
some visibility into Linux technical issues, but I
have absolutely zero visibility into IBM strategic or any
marketing plans) that's a totally separate market, and that
IBM does it for two different reasons:

- it makes sense in the virtualized environment, where
you may want one box, but take advantage of the IBM
superiority in virtualization (others are clearly
working on it, but I don't think anybody will dispute
that IBM is the leader in that area).

NOTE! This market may not be huge, but it's important
for IBM, and most of the machines probably run AIX
in addition (and perhaps as a primary environment).

- I think there is a strategic part to it, which is that
not only has Linux helped IBM bring up several POWER
tape-outs on silicon, I think IBM wants to keep its
options open wrt both the future of POWER and the future
of AIX.

AIX on anything but POWER is clearly not interesting.
Yes, it may work, but let's face it, if IBM were to
ever move away from POWER as its primary high-end
platform, AIX really isn't all that interesting. And
I'm not saying they'll do it, but I bet somebody must
have at least thought hard about what happens if/when
x86-64 beats POWER on all the benchmarks.

So I think IBM wants a strategy for that kind of an
eventuality. Maybe not next year, maybe not the year
after that, but five years from now? Ten? Who knows?
If I were in change of IBM POWER strategy, I'd sure as hell
look at how powerful the mass market is. And I'd make
sure I have my ducks lined up a decade before it actually
happens.

Do you think IBM wants to be caught with its pants down,
with Microsoft beating them senseless not because they
make the best OS (hah), but because they run on the fastest
hardware? I'd say "hell no". I'd be seriously looking for
that "Plan B" to make sure that I don't get caught in that
trap. IBM does not want to be at the mercy of MS
as the only OS vendor on the PC platform. Again.

And that requires Linux on POWER. Because they'd need to
be able to migrate their customers gracefully, and they
need to have a system stack ready that is portable, and
AIX sure as hell isn't it.

The same thing goes for AIX. Keep their options open,
just in case it turns out that AIX doesn't have the legs
or the flexibility.

So none of this has anything to do with IPF, and the fact
that IBM doesn't sell a lot of Linux on POWER doesn't
necessarily bother them, if they feel they need it.

It's not like they need to worry about their Linux/POWER
efforts dragging down their bottom line. The people that
do POWER-specific stuff isn't that large of a group,
and I can pretty much guarantee you that Linux on POWER has
already made them money, if only because of faster and more
productive bring-up of hardware.

So even if they hadn't sold a single POWER machine with
Linux installed to an actual customer, they'd probably have
indirectly paid for their Linux/POWER group thanks to it
helping bring up and do system testing on the chips a few
months earlier.

Search for "BML linux power5 bring-up" on google, you'll
find some of the stories. ("BML" stands for "bare metal
Linux", which is basically Linux on POWER without any need
for firmware/virtualization etc).

Strategic decisions that also end up saving you
tons of money in other areas are the best kind. You don't
want to pay billions of dollars as an insurance policy.
If you can have an insurance policy that also ends up
helping you in other areas and pays you back more than you
put into it (regardless of whether you need it in the end
or not), wouldn't you take it?

Linus

PS. Let me re-iterate: the above is entirely speculative
when it comes to any theory about IBM strategy. So take
it as you may. The bringup advantages are not speculation,
though.
